Slick tongue, too, what I mean.
He was a rapid-fire lecturer.
And, oh, I don't know, this and that.
And in no way did it meant that he was slick to put one over him.
Oh, no, no, no, no.
Never that.
All of our faculty back in those days were rock-solid people.
While we're on nicknames, what were some of the other faculty nicknames in vet medicine in that era?
Oh, you know, they didn't give that many then.
Middleiff was Dr. John?
Dr. John and then A.A.
Leonard and Rusty Beamer and Pappy Burns.
What about Turk?
Did he have one?
No.
Just R.D.
Turk.
I've not heard of one for him.
They just didn't have a whole lot.
And then by the time you're a faculty member, they stopped creating them, didn't they?
Did you have a nickname?
Yeah.
Silver Fox.
That's right.
Why?
I don't know.
I guess I grayed when I was early.
Was your hair, was it already?
Yeah, I grayed when I was 35 or 40.
So, I don't know.
I was always called a silver fox.
What, in fact, what did those nicknames mean?
Well, usually the nickname was
was applied with the idea that a common honor, strangely enough.
I think so.
It wasn't a derogatory thing at all.
It was a warm.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because you know better than I that elsewhere on the campus, some of them didn't sound complimentary.
but in fact, they really were.
Oh, yeah.
Like in history, we had Notes Nance, Ivy League Taylor.
Yeah, Ivy League Taylor.
The man that I succeeded in teaching Southern history was Red Ass Bass.
because he was kind of grumpy.
I had him.
Screaming Al Nelson.
Step and a half had you.
Blue Book Benton in government because you took your tests only in a Blue Book and they were feelings of warmth.
Did I already ask, did anybody give you any guidance, direction or anything as a new faculty member?
None whatsoever.
Things to do or not to do?
As your early years were moving forward, to whom did you turn for advice if you needed to find out how to do something, how to get it done?
Oh, I usually went to Ed McMurray.
Ed had taught me physiology, and he moved down to the assistant to the dean when I came aboard, and so
I would go to Ed and if I had something I couldn't understand by reading it, but nearly all of my materials and everything were just self-taught.
And as far as you, you were a 12-month employee.
Was any of your salary from Experiment Station, or was it all?
It was all on educational funds.
I didn't get it on Experiment Station salary until later when Dr. Neville Clark came.
What were your personal guidelines, your goals,
hopes as a faculty member as you began?
What were you dreaming of doing?
Well, first of all, I didn't intend to stay.
I only
consented to come for one year, September through June, that nine-month period.
And Dr. Burns, I just, well, you couldn't find academic people at that time, and there wasn't anybody taking advanced, the veterinarians weren't taking advanced degrees and so forth.
And I had worked as a student for Dr. Burns for two years.
And I just, well, there weren't Dr. Burns and Dr. Dick Davis and myself.
That was it.
And I just couldn't see going off and leaving them.
So I stayed on.
I still practiced in the summers and
Christmas holidays and times like that with the idea that I would return to practice.
But one thing led to another and there's quite a history as to how I finally got off into academia and got excited about opportunities and so forth.
Describe that.
Well, that'd take a long time to describe that.
Let's stop it right here.
What was it that led you to decide to stay here?
And when you made that decision, what were you dreaming of doing?
I would like to put together a sequence of things that probably meant more to this college.
perhaps this university than anything that's transpired before, and may never again.
But to show you how important one individual with one small step
can influence the whole system.
And I'd like to go back to an individual called Ed McMurray, E.D.
McMurray.
He had been a retired warrant officer, came back, taught veterinary physiology, went down as Dr. Price as assistant to the dean.
And in the summer,
of 1959 or 60, he came by my office, which, not air conditioned, but anyhow, he came by and said he was going to Baylor College of Medicine to take a summer course in physiology.
And I didn't think anything about it at that time.
So he went down to Baylor for, I believe then it was eight weeks summer course in teaching physiology and was introduced to
a thing called a physiograph, which was an ultramodern transducer system for recording physiologic data.
The head of the department at that time was Dr. Hebel Hoff, and his assistant department head was a person named Les Geddes, who was an engineer physiologist.
Dr. Hoff was an MD, PhD physiologist from Harvard.
And so Dr. McMurray went to that summer course.
And back in those days, it took a lot of boldness to go off to do something like that.
I mean, man, he didn't have time and any educational
opportunities above the DVM were seldom taken, and so he went down to Baylor and took that summer course.
And while I'm talking about Dr. McMurray, just as a sideline, he's really also the father of the biomedical sciences program at Texas A&M, which is now the largest
undergraduate program, I think, in the university.
And with time, I'd like to come back to that and expand on it.
But Dr. McMurray came back very enthused from his summer training about new instrumentation, new ideas, new thoughts, and of course the Texas Medical Center being the largest
self-contained medical center in the world now contains two medical schools, Baylor College of Medicine and the University of Texas, a UT Dental School, MD Anderson Hospital, about ten teaching hospitals, and the Veterans Administration, a dental school, a nursing school, a rehabilitation center,
everything that you can think of.
He came back from that course and that environment and insisted that I go take that course the next summer.
And I told him, well, if I'm still here, I'll make an application.
So I made an application to go
to Baylor and take the summer course in about 1960.
And I lived there in Houston and came back and forth on weekends to see my family.
But Dr. Hebel Hoff, who was, as I say, an MD, PhD, and medical historian,
and Dr. Geddes, who was an electrical engineer, Ph.D.
physiologist, were so exciting in their presentation and what they had us do.
We went to the class all morning and lectures and all afternoon in labs.
And students, former medical students, etc., would come back
and just fill the aisles just to hear Dr. Hoff.
And then we had a noon lecture on medical history every day.
And so I came back from that with a vision of what
academia can be and what medicine can be and things to do.
One of the little side lights is I came back.
I had seen an overhead transparency.
Dr. Hoff used it.
And nobody at Texas A&M University had ever used an overhead projector or transparency before.
And so I brought that back as one of my teaching tools, and I had a real difficult time persuading my department head to buy an overhead projector, and even more so in buying transparencies, because they cost about $25 a box of 20 transparencies or something.
But for us, it revolutionized teaching methodology at that time, kind of like PowerPoint does now, I guess.
And that was just a sidelight that I brought back from Baylor.
But I came back, and I was teaching, and I got a call from Dr. Hoff wanting to know if I would come to Baylor
and set up their laboratory animal program.
At that time, there wasn't any laboratory animal programs per se to speak of.
And so I said, well, I can't come until June if I come.
And so he said, well, we're going to pay you.
we're going to give you $1,000 a month, $12,000 a year, which was considerably more, twice or more than I was making, to come down here, set the program up, and we'll also let you work on your doctorate or PhD degree.
So I said, well, let me see what I can arrange and if I can get leave from A&M.
And so at that time you had to go to the
all the way to the Regents to get leave absence, and so Dr. Burns was nice enough to get me at leave absence to go to Baylor, supposedly on a two-year jump.
So I went down and began setting up this program, and being the first veterinarian in the Texas Medical Center, and there was no formal training in laboratory animal medicine, I did not know where to start.
really.
And so I knew the military had some programs in lab animal medicine, and so I went and visited with Dr. Hummer at Brooks Air Force Base and learned what I could about
Lab Animal Medicine, and then after I got started, I realized there was no organization for Lab Animal Medicine, so there was one located up in the northeast.
And so I called them and they said, yeah, we have two regional laboratory animal medicine associations, one in the northeast and one in the northwest.
I said, well, I'd like to do something in Texas.
We don't have any access to information.
And he said, well, these are usually regional things.
And so, but he said, if you can find 60 veterinarians showing any type of interest, we'll make Texas a branch, a laboratory animal branch.
So I got ahold of Dr. Flowers here at Texas A&M, had all the veterinary faculty and the veterinarians that we could collect in the state come here for a meeting and sign a petition.
And we got awarded
Laboratory Animal Medicine Branch for the state of Texas.
And that was about when?
That was probably in 1963 or 4.
And that, and Texas still stands alone as a branch of its own.
Of course, laboratory-owned medicine has advanced so much.
Shortly after that, we began training all the veterinarians in the Air Force in laboratory-owned medicine.
They would come here and take basic training, and then they'd go back to Brooks and do a research problem.
But anyhow, I went down.
took over a laboratory animal program.
We had everything, all kinds of animals.
Facilities were very poor, but at that time Dr. DeBakey was using something like four or five thousand dogs a year in experimental surgery.
So we had a large contingency of dogs, and then that
golly, this just leads on for one thing or another.
I hadn't been there long.
They wanted me to go set up a breeding colony for dogs with the prison system because they could see that dogs were going to become difficult to acquire for experimentation.
So as a satellite, again, I went down to Huntsville with a doctor
Redwire, who was a psychiatrist
who handled all the rich people's psychiatric cases and lawsuits and everything else.
And Houston was worth many, many dollars.
But he, up in age, had taken over a consultant of the prison system.
And Dr. Stanley Olson, who I'll come back to later, the dean of the college, asked me to go to Huntsville and meet the doctor at the wire to see about
building an experimental breeding colony of dogs at the prison and let the prisoners take care of them.
Dr. Dwyer, from their standpoint at the psychiatrist, was that he thought that if we had a breeding colony there, prisoners took care of these animals, that it would develop a human bond relationship that would engender them to be better
as citizens once they were released from prison.
And that was the carrot for the prison system.
And the carrot for Baylor was that Dr. DeBakey and the surgeons would have dogs, a continual supply of dogs.
I went there and built a breeding colony for one dollar a square foot because we used prison bricks and mortar and labor and built a huge breeding colony, a whole 700 dogs.
and we were breeding them, and of course I had an interest in bird dogs, so I filled it with English pointers.
And we must have had thousands and thousands of English pointers, but anyhow, that is still functional.
I mean, it's still ongoing, but that was just a sidelight to the whole system, but that probably was the first
organized human-animal bond program in the United States.
While you were working so hard on that, what were your goals?
What were you dreaming of doing?
Well, I worked directly for Dr. Stanley Olson, who was dean at Baylor College of Medicine.
He's the one that put me into that position as part of my
job to get that started in Houston.
At the same time, I was trying to improve the lab animal facilities in Houston, and so I put in, for example, a clinical laboratory so that the animals could be evaluated before they went on experimentation so that
The doctors would know, especially heartworm, if they were going to do cardiovascular research, need to do blood workup and what have you to find out if they had heartworms.
And I even developed a skin test for heartworms using.
ground up heartworms and making a suspension so I could inject under the skin and if they had heartworms, adult heartworms, they would develop a severe whelp at the site of injection and immune response.
So we could screen animals for research.
That was one thing.
And then I had an animal caretaker named Guy Fane that helped me.
And then, too, we set up a program for training lab animal technicians for all the state and the country under the federal program.
There weren't any lab animal technicians then.
They used to hire people off the street, so we started a program for that.
Were you planning to come back at the
While you were doing that, were you clearly planning to come back here?
Well, you know, I didn't know what I wanted to do.
One thing just led to another.
I could have stayed at Baylor.
In fact, I was offered jobs at Baylor and MD Anderson Bowl.
But I just, Dr. Olson,
Stanley Olson and, of course, my major professor, Dr. Hoff, were just such outstanding people.
But Dr. Olson called me one day and he said, I would like to see if A&M would be interested in setting up an Institute of Comparative Medicine.
And I said, well, there's nothing for us to do but meet with the
Veterinary College Executive Committee and Dean and try on the idea.
So, Dr. Olson and I got in the car, his car, and came to College Station.
And this is something because Dr. Olson was a renowned physician and dean and educator and everything.
To get him to come down up to College Station, meet with a group of very conservative veterinary department heads,
And at that time, no one had ever heard of comparative medicine.
This all went back to Osler.
whom you historians know, the man with the agenda of one medicine.
He was a physician back in, I guess, 1600, 1700.
But he believed in one medicine.
So from that, Dr. Olson said, well, let's call it comparative medicine.
So we came and talked to the executive committee one morning.
and told them we'd like to set up an Institute of Comparative Medicine.
There would be veterinarians located at Baylor.
They would work with the College of Veterinary Medicine and we would identify animal models with spontaneous disease and other things that we could use between the two institutions.
And you can imagine these conservative
teacher, veterinary-oriented group of department heads.
They thought about it, and so after a bit they said, well, you know, if y'all can find the money and you want to do it, well, we'll do it.
And so that began what we call the Institute of Comparative Medicine.
We got state funding for it.
Dr. DeBakey went for us to get that funding.
That was a trade-out situation.
Mr. Rutter was to
helped Dr. DeBakey get funding for Baylor College of Medicine, which was a private medical school.
This is another sidelight.
Early on, Dr. Rutter or Mr. Rutter and Abner McCall
I was contacted.
By being the first veterinarian and A&M person, I guess, kind of in the Texas Medical Center, everything that would happen in the medical center or relationships, I would get involved just because of that.
But anyhow, they contacted me one day and Abner McCall said, let me give Baylor College of Medicine
to the Texas A&M University's system.
He said, we're putting $25,000 a year in the Baylor College of Medicine.
That's strapping our budget.
We're not seeing anything really out of it that helps us, Baylor-Waco.
And so Abner McCall and Earl Rutter were very good friends.
They got together, arranged for me to transfer Baylor College of Medicine to Texas A&M University.
And everything was going very well until they got to the organizational structure and Baylor College of Medicine insisted that they retain their own board of directors.
And General Rutter said you can't have two board of directors in the system.
He's a straight line item.
And so he declined.
And this was about what year?
That would have been in 1960, probably about 1967.
And all of these discussions were private?
Oh, yeah, that was all private stuff.
And none of it was ever in the paper?
Never in the paper, never recorded.
And as far as you're aware, if the board of directors issue had been resolved, the Baylor College of Medicine would now be part of Texas University.
But that did not come to be.
working with Dr. Olson, going back to funding for the Institute of Comparative Medicine, and Dr. DeBakey, and I worked indirectly for Dr. DeBakey and Dr. Olson when I was at Baylor.
Dr. DeBakey finally became President and Chancellor of the Medical Center.
But there was a trade-out.
He would
help us get the money for the Institute of Comparative Medicine, which we set up offices at Baylor and hired five veterinarians and began that, if Mr. Rutter would help him get state funding for Baylor College of Medicine, which was a private institution.
At that time, Baylor probably took somewhere around 85 or 90 percent of its students were outside the state of Texas.
They recruited nationwide for students and had scholarships for a lot of them.
So what they went to Austin and persuaded the legislature to pay a pro rata per student what they were paying for Texas other medical schools.
And so that happened, and Baylor now is probably 15 percent out of state and 85 percent
in-state and paying that per capita hid.
So it worked out well for a bailer.
And then the Institute of Comparative Medicine went along for about five or six years and was snuffed out on a line item.
As a line item it was
It was lined out when Dr. Jarvis Miller was president, and the governor called him.
The only thing the governor could do to a budget was to attack line items, and A&M had several line items, and so they agreed that the Institute of Comparative Medicine would be one that could be sacrificed.
This is the late 70s.
Did the governor give any explanation as to why that one?
We just had to cut so much money.
Okay.
So the institute lasted about 10 years.
Well, probably, you know, I'd have to go back.
It led to lots of other things.
But we hired five or six veterinarians and a director and set them up inside of Baylor College of Medicine.
and began to collect or to do research on animals, comparative animals and diseases and surgicals and heart transplants and heart, mechanical hearts and all that kind of thing.
And that led to a real close relationship
between Baylor College of Medicine and Texas A&M and A&M College of Veterinary Medicine.
And that relationship has continued until the present, but there have been lots of other things that occur in between there.
As a result, this all goes back to Ed McMurray, a summer course, development of Dr. Stanley Olson's great person idea of a comparative medicine institute.
And then spinning out of that, Dr. Jack Kenny Williams,
called me one day and said that he wanted Texas A&M University to have a medical school, or medical college, and he wanted Texas A&M University to have a college of law.
and he called Dr. Winerti and myself together.
Dr. Winerti I had put in touch with Baylor on a research project on using isotopes as diagnostics, etc.
and he was overhead of the
Activation Analysis Laboratory at that time.
So that got him involved.
We put in a big grant together on activation analysis, use of medicine.
But that got him involved, so the president asked that Dr. Winery and I develop a medical school at Texas A&M.
So we set about to do that, and he was going to bring a law school here, and set about to do that with